# Abstract
Genetic mosaicism, characterized by genetically distinct cell populations within an individual, can result in various health adversities depending on developmental timing, mutation location, cell type, and fraction. Somatic mosaic chromosomal aberrations (mCAs) are large structural mutations in genomic DNA that can lead to mosaicism. mCAs are associated with cancer in humans and serve as potential biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment. Investigating the genomic factors that lead to the formation of mCAs can greatly advance current understanding of the underlying mechanisms of cancer formation. However, there are no known genomic factors in humans that would increase the risk for the development of mCAs due to genetic and environmental complexities, especially for rare cancers with small cohorts. Canine populations present an attractive model in comparative genomics for studying cancer genetics because of the genetically homogeneous nature of breeds. Here, we evaluate the use of dogs as a comparative model to identify breeds that may carry genomic factors potentially responsible for the development of mCAs. Specifically, we show that mCAs occur in dogs using the MoChA pipeline and find associations between mCAs and observable phenotypes, comparing results with human studies when applicable. We also aim to identify mCA types that could be indicative of cancer status. We detected 816 mCAs in 441 dogs of the 4134 dogs in the dataset. We found that mCA counts were not significantly different across sex. We also found that overall mCA counts were not significantly different across specific breeds. However, we did find that golden retrievers and boxers are more likely to have multiple mCAs, given all samples had at least 1 mCA. We also show that individuals with cancer are more likely to have mCAs. We identified that a CN-LOH on chromosome 1 and a gain on chromosome 31 are relatively more informative towards cancer modelling.
